---
layout: chapter
title: The Ruby C API
---

## Before You Start ##

For the greatest chance of success with this guide, I recommend being fairly
comfortable with C and _very_ comfortable with Ruby.

Using Ruby's C API does not require any advanced C concepts, however the API is
**huge** and largely **undocumented**. After you start using it, you will likely
find yourself delving through the Ruby source code at some point to figure out
the behavior of some obscure function or macro. The Ruby source uses some fairly
sophisticated C, so you should at least feel comfortable reading it.

You can think of the C API is being a big, clunky alternative to writing normal
Ruby code. However the simple, elegant patterns of Ruby can be pretty
unintuitive once translated into the language of the API. Having a strong
intuition for Ruby's internal logic and the ideas behind its design will go a
long way toward steering you toward the correct API functions.

## The Two Paths ##

The official Ruby interpreter is written in C. That means that everything you
can do in Ruby, you can also do using function calls to Ruby's C API. Why in the
world would you do this? There are two good reasons:

1. You're writing some fancy application in C or C++ and you want some parts of
   your code to leverage the dynamic flexibility of Ruby. You can run the
   Ruby interpreter inside of your application and use the API to retrieve the
   results of Ruby code.
2. You're writing some fancy application in Ruby and you want some parts of your
   code to leverage the speed and power of C (or an existing C library). You can
   expose C code to Ruby using the API and compile a special library that Ruby
   can `require`.

You'll need to structure your C code differently depending on your goal. If
you want to embed the Ruby interpreter in C, read [Running Ruby in C](../embed). If
you want to `require` a compiled C library, read [Running C in Ruby](../extend).
After you finish that, come back here to learn about the API.

## Eval ##

The quick 'n' dirty way to run some Ruby code from C is to `eval` it

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/eval.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

This is a good fallback if you can't find an API function for something that you
want to do[^wrap]. `rb_eval_string_protect()` returns the result of the Ruby
code and sets `state` to some nonzero value if any exception is raised. `VALUE`
is the C data type for all Ruby objects, as explained in the next section.

If `state` is nonzero, `result` will be a `VALUE` representing `nil` and you
should handle the exception. Alternatively, you can use `rb_eval_string()` which
doesn't take a `state` argument and instead raises any exceptions normally. See
[Exceptions](#exceptions) for how to handle both of these cases.

Unlike `eval` in Ruby, these functions evaluate the string in an isolated
binding&mdash;like when you `require` something. So local variables in the
string will not be accessible from elsewhere and vice versa.

However, like using `eval` in Ruby, using these functions is not a good
practice. It's inefficient since the parser is invoked and it somewhat defeats
the point of writing in C. If you just want to call some Ruby method, we'll go
over a better way to do that [later on](#send).

## VALUE ##

Before we go any further, we need to understand `VALUE`s. Due to the danger of
monkeying around inside the VM, the API never lets you directly access Ruby's
objects[^intern]. Instead, your C code will store and pass around _pointers_ to
Ruby objects (like how variables in Ruby contain pointers to objects). These
pointers can be passed to various API functions and macros that will safely
access and manipulate the Ruby objects. `VALUE` is the API-defined C type for
these pointers.

Probably the most frequent question you'll have is: "is this `VALUE` the right
type?". There are a couple macros for performing this test, and both take a
[`T_` constant][datatypes] corresponding to the Ruby class you're
testing for e.g. `T_STRING`, `T_ARRAY`, etc.

[datatypes]: https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/master/doc/extension.rdoc#label-Data+Types

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/checktype.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

These tests work for subclasses too: if you're testing for a subclass of `Array`
use `T_ARRAY`, if you're testing for a subclass of `Object` use
`T_OBJECT`[^tdata]. That being said, these tests _do not work like `is_a?`_;
even though everything in Ruby `is_a? Object`, testing against `T_OBJECT` will
only return true for objects for which there is no better fitting constant.

For certain classes, there are specialized macros that are a little more
efficient than the previous:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/check_p.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

If you want to handle a `VALUE` that could be one of a variety of types, the
previous macros can be a little clumsy. In that case you can use the `TYPE()`
macro to get the `T_` constant and handle your logic in a `switch`:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/type.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Constants ###

Most of the standard Ruby constants have global `VALUE`s defined for them in the
API so you don't need an API call to access them. Modules are prefixed with
`rb_m` e.g. `rb_mKernel`; classes are prefixed with `rb_c` e.g. `rb_cObject`;
subclasses of `Exception` are prefixed with `rb_e` e.g. `rb_eRuntimeError`; and
the standard IO streams are prefixed with `rb_` e.g. `rb_stderr`. `nil`,
`false`, and `true` are prefixed with `Q` e.g. `Qnil`.[^undef] As a convenience,
`Qfalse` is also false in C (`0`).

### Translation ###

A few Ruby classes are analogous to C types. These classes will be your primary
means of transferring data between C and Ruby.

#### Fixnum ####

Ruby's `Fixnum` corresponds to C's `long`. The `FIX2LONG()` macro gives you the
`long` for a `Fixnum`. For smaller C types there's `FIX2UINT()`, `FIX2INT()`,
and `FIX2SHORT()`, but these will raise a `RangeError` if the number wouldn't
fit.

In the other direction, `LONG2FIX()` works for `long` **and** every smaller
integer C type[^chr].

#### Bignum ####

Ruby's `Bignum` is for anything bigger than a `Fixnum`, so it works if you need
to work with `long long`, for example. `rb_big2ll()` and `rb_big2ull()` will get
you `long long` and `unsigned long long` from a `Bignum` (or raise a
`RangeError` if appropriate).

See [Numeric](#numeric) for the reverse direction.

#### Float ####

Ruby's `Float` corresponds to C's `double`. The `RFLOAT_VALUE()` macro gives you the
`double` for a `Float`.

See [Numeric](#numeric) for the reverse direction.

#### Numeric ####

There are a host of "NUM" macros that try to be more duck-typish about things.
These will convert their C types to whatever Ruby `Numeric` subclass seems
appropriate:

* `INT2NUM()` for `int`
* `UINT2NUM()` for `unsigned int`
* `LONG2NUM()` for `long`
* `ULONG2NUM()` for `unsigned long`
* `LL2NUM()` for `long long`
* `ULL2NUM()` for `unsigned long long`
* `DBL2NUM()` for `double`

And there are macros for the opposite direction, which will try to convert
whatever `Numeric` to the desired C type. These will raise a `RangeError` if
the value wouldn't fit or `TypeError` if there is no implicit numeric conversion
(so you can safely pass non-`Numeric` objects).

* `NUM2CHR()` for `char` (works for `unsigned char` too)
* `NUM2SHORT()` for `short`
* `NUM2USHORT()` for `unsigned short`
* `NUM2INT()` for `int`
* `NUM2UINT()` for `unsigned int`
* `NUM2LONG()` for `long`
* `NUM2ULONG()` for `unsigned long`
* `NUM2LL()` for `long long`
* `NUM2ULL()` for `unsigned long long`
* `NUM2DBL()` for `double`

A **major** gotcha with these is that _none_ of the macros for converting to
unsigned types raise an exception if you pass a negative value (surprisingly
this [isn't a bug][bug]). `NUM2CHR()` also has a couple quirks: it will only
raise a `RangeError` if the value is too big for an _int_ and when passed a
string it returns the numeric value of the first character rather than raising a
`TypeError`.

If you know that the conversion is safe, you should prefer the macros from the
previous sections as they skip the range checks.

[bug]: https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/9089

#### String ####

Ruby's `String` kinda corresponds to C's `char*`. The simplest macro is
`StringValueCStr()` which returns a null-terminated `char*` for a `String`. The
problem here is that a Ruby `String` _might contain nulls_ - in which case
`StringValueCStr()` will raise an `ArgumentError`! Instead you can use the
macros `StringValuePtr()` and `RSTRING_LEN()` to get a (possibly unterminated)
`char*` and the string's length as a `long`.

Conversely, if you have a null-terminated `char*`, you can use
`rb_str_new_cstr()` to create a Ruby `String`. And if you want your `String` to
contain nulls, use `rb_str_new()` which takes a `char*` and the string's length
(as a `long`). The encodings of these strings will be `ASCII-8BIT`, which is
often undesirable in Ruby. You can pass the string `VALUE` to
`rb_str_export_locale()` to get a new `VALUE` with your locale's
encoding[^wchar].

If you want to build more complex strings, you can do so using the `printf`-like
function `rb_sprintf()`. This accepts all of the usual conversion specifiers,
but also accepts an API-defined specifier `PRIsVALUE` which takes a
corresponding `VALUE` argument. This conversion specifier substitutes a string
by sending the object `to_s`. You can substitute the result of `inspect` instead
by adding the `+` flag.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/printf.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

This custom specifier should work for any `printf`-like function in the API.
`PRIsVALUE` works by hijacking the `i` conversion specifier, so when printing
an `int` you should use `d` to ensure that Ruby doesn't think it's actually a
`VALUE`.

#### Symbol ####

The API defines a C type `ID` which corresponds to Ruby's `Symbol`. Just like
how Ruby passes around `Symbol`s as method or variable names, many API calls
that need a method or variable name use an `ID`. To convert between a `Symbol`
and an `ID` use the `SYM2ID()` and `ID2SYM()` macros. Instead of a `Symbol` you
may want to convert to/from a `char*` C string. To get an `ID` from a `char*`
use `rb_intern()` and for the reverse use `rb_id2name()`.

Since many API functions require an `ID` and in many cases you will not have the
appropriate `ID` at hand, the API also defines a slew of functions that instead
take a `char*` and which do the `rb_intern()` call for you. Since these
functions are often more readable and the overhead of the `rb_intern()` call is
negligible, I have opted to use the `char*` versions of the API functions
wherever possible in this guide. If you find yourself frequently using a certain
C string in API calls, you may see some performance benefit by storing the `ID`
and using the `ID` versions of the functions (though you'll have to look these
up yourself in the Ruby headers).

## Send ##

This section contains API functions for directly calling Ruby methods. You
should prefer these functions to `rb_eval_string()` and the like whenever
possible. They are faster since they skip the parser and allow for some
compile-time checks.

The easiest way to send an object a method looks like this:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/funcall.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

This is roughly equivalent to the Ruby code

{% highlight ruby %}
{% include c/funcall.rb %}
{% endhighlight %}

The first argument is the receiver. The next is the [`ID`](#symbol) for the
method name. The third argument is the number of method arguments, which is
needed since `rb_funcall()` is a varargs function. Then come the actual method
arguments.

Alternatively, you can use `rb_funcallv()` where the fourth argument is a
`VALUE*` pointing to a C array of arguments. This also has the variant
`rb_funcallv_public()` which is like `public_send` in Ruby.

### Passing Blocks ###

If you want to pass a `Proc` as the block to a method, that's easy. The function
is just like `rb_funcallv()` but with the proc on the end.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/proc.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

If you don't have a proc for the block, you'll need to define a certain kind of
C function to represent the block. Then there's a different variant of
`rb_funcallv()` but with a couple extra arguments for the block:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/block.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

The last argument to `rb_block_call()` is helpful for passing in values outside
the block function's scope, but in this example we don't need it (thus `nil`). I
also recommend against using the first argument to your block function unless
you're **sure** that only one value was yielded. You can always get all the
arguments from `argv`, so why not play it safe?[^break]

## Builtins ##

Many of Ruby's built-in classes have API functions defined for their most useful
methods. Using them can save you from the verbosity of always using
`rb_funcall()` and can provide more compile-time checks. There are far too many
functions to list here, so I recommend checking them out in the header
`ruby/intern.h`.

Functions are generally named like `rb_(class)_(method)` and take at least one
`VALUE` argument (the receiver). E.g. `rb_ary_pop()` for `Array#pop`,
`rb_obj_dup()` for `Object#dup`, etc.

## Require ##

The API can also load some Ruby code from a script. There's an equivalent to
`require`:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/require.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

As with `require`, these could raise exceptions. Read the [next
section](#exceptions) for how to handle them.

There are also functions for `load` if you want to load a script multiple times:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/load.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Just like [`load` in Ruby][rbload], these functions can wrap the loaded code in
an anonymous module to protect the global namespace. Just pass a nonzero value
for the second argument.

[rbload]: http://www.ruby-doc.org/core/Kernel.html#method-i-load

## Exceptions ##

### Raise ###

To raise an exception, use:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/raise.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

The first and second arguments are the exception class and message&mdash;like
`raise` in Ruby. The big difference is that the message is a format string [just
like in `rb_sprintf()`](#string), letting you more easily build a useful
message.

You can also construct exception objects directly using `rb_exc_new_cstr`,
`rb_exc_new`, and `rb_exc_new_str`. All of these accept an exception class as
their first argument and then they work just like their [string](#string)
counterparts, constructing an exception using a null-terminated string,
non-null-terminated string, and a `String` object, resp. Then you can raise your
exception object with `rb_exc_raise`.

### Rescue ###

There are several ways to rescue exceptions using the API. All of them require
the code you're protecting to be in a function that takes and returns a single
`VALUE`.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/danger.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Unless you wanted to rescue a function of exactly this type, you will probably
need to make a wrapper function in this format that runs the desired code. The
way to access a rescued exception is also independent of the way it is rescued:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/handle.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

`rb_errinfo()` essentially gives you the `VALUE` of Ruby's `$!` (which will be
`Qnil` if no exception occurred). Unlike in Ruby, you must manually clear the
exception after reading it[^clear]. Otherwise later API calls might read the old
value and think another exception has occurred.

Next we will go over several methods of rescuing; you can use whichever you
like, but I think that generally the right choice is determined by your
[use-case](#the-two-paths) of the API.

#### rb_rescue2 ####

If you're compiling a library to be loaded by Ruby, you have it easy. Any
exceptions raised in the API can be rescued as usual in your Ruby code. If you
want to rescue an exception in the API, you can use `rb_rescue2()` which is
similar to Ruby's `rescue`.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/rescue2.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

The first two arguments are the function to protect and its argument, the next
two are the function to call if an exception is raised and its argument.
`rb_rescue2()` is a varargs function, so after that comes a list of the
exception classes you want to rescue. The last argument should always be `0` to
indicate the end of the class list. Like `rescue` in Ruby, any exceptions not in
this list will not be rescued. If you just want to rescue `StandardError` (like
a blank `rescue` in Ruby), you can use `rb_rescue()` which takes just the first
four arguments of `rb_rescue2()`.

The API does not provide an easy way to run different rescue code for different
exception classes as Ruby does. You'll need to rescue all the classes you want
at once and use some kind of switch to handle them separately.

The API also does not directly provide an equivalent to Ruby's `else` i.e. code
to run when _no_ exception was raised. One way to do this is using the return
value of `rb_rescue2()`. If no exception is raised, it returns the return value
of the first (dangerous) function, otherwise the return value of the second
(rescue) function. By having these return, say, `Qtrue` and `Qfalse` you can
detect which case you are in.

#### rb_protect ####

If you're embedding the Ruby interpreter in C, you need to be _extremely
careful_ when calling API functions that could raise exceptions: **an uncaught
exception will segfault the VM and kill your program**. You could call
`rb_rescue2()` with `rb_eException`, but there's another approach for rescuing
all exceptions:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/protect.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Like `rb_rescue2()`, the first two arguments are for calling the function to
protect. However, like `rb_eval_string_protect()`, if an exception is raised
it returns `Qnil` and sets `state` to some nonzero value. If you want to
re-raise the exception, pass `state` to `rb_jump_tag()` (this also works for the
state from the other `*_protect()` functions).

### Ensure ###

`rb_ensure()` is similar to `rb_rescue()` except that it doesn't do anything
about exceptions and the second function is _always_ called after the first.
That may sound simple enough, but that means that if you want the usual `begin;
rescue; ensure; end` structure as in Ruby, you'll need another layer of
wrapping:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/ensure.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Like `ensure` in Ruby, the return value of `ensure_func()` is never used. If no
exception occurs, `rb_rescue()` will return the value of `begin_func()` which
returns the value of `dangerous_func()`. If an exception does occur,
`rb_rescue()` returns the value of `rescue_func()`.

## Definitions, Declarations ##

So far we've been creating and modifying objects directly in the VM's memory,
but none of our API calls have had a visible effect _within the Ruby code_: a
`String` made with `rb_str_new_cstr()` can only be accessed from C by default.

There are a few ways to make things visible to Ruby but they all work the same
general way: by defining some name that Ruby can access e.g. a variable name, a
method name, etc. A general warning though: unlike Ruby, **the API lets you give
things invalid names**. Ruby will raise a `SyntaxError` or `NameError` if you
try to name a class `foo` (not constant) or an instance variable `bar` (no `@`),
but the API will happily create them. The API handles this by **not exposing
invalid names to Ruby**. Since that's probably not what you want, double check
the names you choose!

Most of the API functions in this section correspond closely to metaprogramming
methods in Ruby. When you're trying to do something using the API, it can be
helpful to think about how you would do it in Ruby using only metaprogramming
method calls. For example, rather than `class Foo; def bar; end; end`, think
`Foo = Class.new; Foo.define_method(:bar) {}`.

### Global Variables ###

The simplest way to deal with globals is:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/global.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

If you're frequently accessing Ruby's globals, you can set up a `VALUE` which
will be automatically synchronized with one.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/global2.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

The `VALUE` should be initialized before you create the global in Ruby and it
should be global in C as well&mdash;you don't want it to go out of scope while
Ruby is using it! For `rb_define_hooked_variable()`, you can pass `NULL` for the
getter/setter if you want to synchronize normally for that operation. Or you can
throw out `global` entirely with `rb_define_virtual_variable()` though of course
the getter and setter _must_ be defined in that case.

If you ever create a global `VALUE` in C which is _not_ exposed to Ruby, you
must tell the garbage collector about it to prevent it from being prematurely
cleaned up:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/gc.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Class and Instance Variables ###

Getting/setting instance variables is similar to the simple way of accessing
globals, but of course you need an object to get the variable from.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/ivar.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

There isn't an automatic way to synchronize instance variables like you can with
globals.

To iterate over all instance variables, use `rb_ivar_foreach`.

For class variables, the methods are `rb_cv_get()` and `rb_cv_set()` and of
course the first argument should be a class object.

### Constants ####

Constants are defined similarly, but with the module to define them under:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/constant.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

You undefine a constant by setting it to `Qundef`. Getting a constant's `VALUE`
is a little nuanced. The API function you call depends on what you want to
happen if the constant is _not_ defined in the module you specify:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/const_get.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

All of these API calls will get private constants too.

### Modules and Classes ###

Defining modules is super easy.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/module.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Classes work the same way but they also need a superclass.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/class.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Methods ###

Here's where it gets interesting. There are many kinds of API calls for defining
methods, but before you use any of them you'll need a C function that the method
calls. The function must return a `VALUE` and have one `VALUE` argument for the
receiver of the method. There are three ways you can define its other arguments:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/methodc.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

So really the API only lets you define two types of methods: ones that take a
fixed number of arguments, and ones that slurp up all of their arguments. What
about all of Ruby's fancy argument features? Where are optional arguments,
options hashes, blocks, and all the mixtures of those?

#### Parsing Arguments ####

Well, if you accept a variable number of arguments you could code all of that
logic yourself in the method, and make it _behave_ like it has a fancier method
definition in Ruby. Thankfully, the API has a shortcut for doing exactly that.
To use it, you should use the C array function definition, then you can pass
`argc` and `argv` along to:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/scan.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Here `fmt` is a format string describing how the method arguments would look in
Ruby. The string can have at most 6 characters, where each character describes a
different section of the arguments. The six sections and their corresponding
characters are (in order):

1. The number of leading mandatory arguments: a digit
2. The number of optional arguments: a digit
3. A splatted argument: `*`
4. The number of trailing mandatory arguments: a digit
5. Keyword arguments: `:`
6. A block argument: `&`

Each section is optional, so you can leave out the characters for things you
don't need. Be aware that the parsing of the format string is greedy: `1*`
describes a method with one mandatory argument and a splat. If you want one
_optional_ argument and a splat you must specify `01*`. Following the format
string, you must pass a `VALUE*` for each _Ruby_ argument. The number of
pointers passed should equal the "total" of the six sections, though you can
pass `NULL` for an argument you don't care about. For example the format string
`21*&` should have 5 `VALUE*`s passed (2 mandatory, 1 optional, 1 splatted, 1
block).

`rb_scan_args()` unpacks `argv` using the `VALUE*`s you pass it and will
raise a fitting exception if the wrong number of arguments were passed.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/methodex.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

You can also use the return value of `rb_scan_args()` to determine how the
function was called. It returns the number of arguments that were passed in
Ruby.

#### Handling Blocks ####

There are two ways to check if your C method has been called with a block:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/checkblock.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

There are two ways to capture the block as a proc. If you're using
`rb_scan_args()` for your method arguments, just include `&` in your format
string to get it. If you aren't using `rb_scan_args()`, there's an API call
equivalent to `Proc.new` which converts the method's block to a proc:

    VALUE block;
    block = rb_block_proc();

If you don't want to capture the block, there are a few ways to yield to it:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/yield.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

There's also `rb_yield_values2()` which is like `rb_yield_values()` but instead
of varargs the second argument is a `VALUE*`[^yield].

#### Super ####

You might want to call `super` in your method.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/super.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Unlike in Ruby `rb_call_super()` will **not** implicitly pass along the method
arguments to the super if you give it no arguments. You must explicitly pass the
correct `argc` and `argv` (it _does_ automatically pass `self`). For that reason
I recommend using the C array style of method definition if you want to use
`rb_call_super()`.

#### Definition ####

Setting up the C function is the hard part, now it's easy to define the method
in Ruby. Every API call to create a method takes at least the method name
(`char*`), a pointer to your C function, and an `argc` describing its arguments.
`argc` should be:

1. For a fixed number of arguments, the number of arguments (not counting the
   receiver)
2. For a variable number of arguments in a C array, `-1`
3. For a variable number of arguments in a Ruby Array, `-2`

Everything is pretty self-explanatory from there:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/methodr.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

There's also a shortcut for defining a method in a module _and_ its
singleton class. This is used a lot in `Math`, for example, letting you `include
Math` to avoid typing `Math.` before every method call.

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/modulefunc.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Other Stuff ###

Some simple API functions for class/method definitions:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/etc.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

## Data ##

By now you should be able to create and manipulate Ruby classes using the API,
but how can you create a Ruby class that encapsulates data from the C world? If
your data can be naturally translated into `VALUE`s it's easy: convert and
assign to instance variables as usual. But what if your data have no Ruby analog
(e.g. data structures defined by some C library)?

The API lets you encapsulate C data by creating a `VALUE` of the desired class
and then storing a `void*` pointing to the C data inside the Ruby object. Then
whenever you need access to the C data, you can unpack the pointer and cast it
back to the correct type. But where does this encapsulation occur? Let's answer
that question with a question: what happens when you tell Ruby to create an
object using `new`? Basically this:

{% highlight ruby %}
{% include c/new.rb %}
{% endhighlight %}

Before calling the _instance method_ `initialize` that we know so well, `new`
first calls the _class method_ `allocate` to actually create the object. That is
the method you'll need to define if you want your objects to wrap C data. The
following example creates a class `Foo` which wraps an `int` that can be set
by `initialize`:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/wrap.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

In most cases you'll probably be wrapping something more complicated (like a
`struct`), but the principles will be the same. After allocating the C data, we
use the `TypedData_Wrap_Struct()`[^oldwrap] macro to wrap the pointer in a
`VALUE`. This wrapping takes three arguments: the class of the object (`self`
because we're in a class method), a pointer to a struct, and the data pointer to
be wrapped. The tricky part is the struct pointer; it provides additional
information for internal use by Ruby:

* `wrap_struct_name` is a string used by Ruby to identify your type. It doesn't
  really matter what it is as long as it's sensible and unique
* `function` is a struct containing several function pointers for use by the
  garbage collector
* `dmark` will be described later, but as long your C data doesn't point to any
  Ruby objects you don't need it
* `dfree` will be called when your object is destroyed and should free all
  memory allocated by the object
* `dsize` is called by Ruby to check how much memory your object is taking up.
  It _can_ be omitted, but it's polite to include it
* `data` can point to arbitrary data. Think of it as wrapping C data at a class
  level. Also not manadatory
* `flags` lets you enable additional optimizations when your objects are
  garbage collected. As long as your `dfree` function doesn't unlock the
  [GVL](#c-in-ruby-threads) (why would you do that???) you can safely set it to
  `RUBY_TYPED_FREE_IMMEDIATELY` for a slight performance improvement

If you don't set some of these members, you should zero them out so that Ruby
doesn't accidentally read garbage data. That's why I used C99's [designated
initializer][desinit] syntax in the example above: any members you omit will be
safely cleared by the compiler.

[desinit]: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Designated-Inits.html

Notice also that when I defined the class, I derived from `rb_cData` instead of
`rb_cObject`. `VALUE`s that wrap C data will have type `T_DATA` with respect to
the [`TYPE()` macro](#value). This helps ensure a clear separation between
native Ruby objects and those wrapping C data.

Once you've done all of that work to wrap up the C data, getting it back out is
easy: `TypedData_Get_Struct()` takes the object to unwrap, the C type of the
underlying data, the same struct pointer as before, and the pointer to assign
the data to.

This separation of allocation and initialization doesn't jive with [RAII][raii],
so if you're using C++ you will probably want to use [placement new][place] when
wrapping data. If you're having trouble splitting up allocation and
initialization, you can just wrap your data in a `struct` and do the _actual_
allocation in `initialize`.

[raii]: http://wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Acquisition_Is_Initialization
[place]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/new#Allocation

In simple cases (like the previous example) you can make your code a little less
verbose. If the function to free your data just calls `free()` as in the
example, you can pass `RUBY_DEFAULT_FREE` for `dfree` and Ruby will
free it for you (**don't** use `NULL` unless you like memory leaks). Similarly,
if your allocation is just a `malloc()` as in the example, the macro
`TypedData_Make_Struct()` does the allocation for you _and_ wraps it. We could
shorten the previous example as such:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/makestruct.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Marking ###

That `dmark` pointer in the type structure above is the pointer to your object's
"mark function". This is so named because of the garbage collector's "mark and
sweep" algorithm. The basic idea behind mark and sweep is that when the garbage
collector needs to free up memory, it performs two passes: the first (mark) pass
iterates through every _referenced_ Ruby object and marks it as active, then the
second (sweep) pass iterates through every _allocated_ Ruby object and frees the
ones that haven't been marked active.

This is relevant to wrapping C data because it's possible that you might wrap a
C `struct` which contains a Ruby `VALUE`&mdash;which the garbage collector is
responsible for cleaning up. Since the garbage collector is only aware of
`VALUE`s referenced _by Ruby_ (not by C pointers), it won't be able to mark the
referenced `VALUE` as active. The result is that as soon as the garbage
collector needs to free up some memory, your C data is going to end up with a
reference to a nonexistent Ruby object. Note that this kind of wrapping of Ruby
data inside C data is a really bad idea, precisely because of this kind of
issue. But if you really must...

In the following example, we'll wrap a C `struct` which contains a `VALUE`. The
mark function has the same signature as the free function and all it has to do
is mark any `VALUE`s in the `struct`:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/mark.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

If your `struct` contains a pointer to a C array of `VALUE`s, you can instead
use `rb_gc_mark_locations()` which takes two arguments: the pointers to the
start and end of the array (the end being equal to the starting pointer plus the
array length).[^maybe]

## Threading ##

### Ruby in C Threads ###

If you're making a lot of API calls and running a lot of Ruby code from C, at
some point you might catch yourself thinking, "I'm running all of these slow
Ruby methods using the API. Maybe I can thread things to keep my code fast!"
That's a reasonable thought, but when you act on it keep in mind that **the Ruby
VM is not at all thread safe**. Ideally, all of your API code should run in a
single thread. If not, you'll probably need to wrap every API call with a locked
mutex to make sure that you never ever have multiple threads interacting with
the API at the same time.

If you just want to create normal Ruby `Thread`s using the API (and don't mind
the GVL, as described in the next section), there's an easy way to do that:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/thread.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Other `Thread` functions are in `ruby/intern.h` (but there's always
`rb_funcall()` for everything else).

### C in Ruby Threads ###

On the other hand, if you expose some heavy C code to Ruby with the API (if
you're writing an extension that wraps a C library, for example), you should
spend some time thinking about a nasty thing called the global VM lock (GVL).
Because most of the API is not `Thread` safe, the GVL locks down almost all Ruby
code so that only a single `Thread` can run at a time. This is the reason why
you'll often hear people say that `Thread` does not allow true parallelism.

The VM also applies the GVL to any C code you expose to Ruby. That's why you can
use the API without worrying about it exploding when someone calls your C code
from inside a `Thread`. The downside of this is that if your C code takes a
while to run, you won't see any performance benefit from calling it in a
`Thread` because **it will block all other threads** while it runs. But the GVL
is only needed to protect API calls. If you have some C code that doesn't use
the API, you can tell the VM to release the GVL before running your code in a
thread and to reacquire it when it completes, allowing for true parallelism.
Locking and unlocking the GVL does carry a performance hit, so only resort to
this if you notice that you're having significant problems due to blocked
threads.

The code to do this is considered so fancy by the Ruby developers that you
actually need to include another header to use it. First we'll look at the
slightly simpler way to release the GVL:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/gvl2.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

Since the function that is run without the GVL gets and returns data using
`void*`, you may want to define a `struct` for passing data via pointers.

If you unlock the GVL as above you will find that while your code does run
in parallel, it can't be interrupted (by signals, `Thread.kill`, etc.)! To
allow for that you must pass an unblocking function using the last two
arguments:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/gvl.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

The unblocking function is called in the event of an interrupt. To make it work,
you will probably need to pass a pointer to both functions that can be used to
communicate an interrupt from one to the other. The interrupted function should
perform any necessary cleanup before returning early.

Alternatively, if the interrupted function doesn't _need_ to perform any special
cleanup, you can use the built in unblocking function `RUBY_UBF_IO`[^ubf]
(which ignores the unblocking argument). That simply forwards the interrupt to
the running thread.[^int]

If you go through all of that effort to release the GVL only to find that you
need to make an API call in your unlocked thread, there's a function to
temporarily reacquire the GVL:

{% highlight c %}
{% include c/with_gvl.h %}
{% endhighlight %}

## See Also ##

### extension.rdoc ###

Ruby does have [official API documentation][readme]. It's a bit spotty and has
some poor recommendations (in my opinion), but it is also a little more
exhaustive on certain topics. In many cases this is because I intentionally
skipped something that I either found not useful or better documented elsewhere.

[readme]: https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/master/doc/extension.rdoc

### Headers ###

I think some of the handiest resources are the Ruby headers themselves. The full
API (i.e. everything you get by including `ruby.h`) easily consists of a
thousand functions, macros, constants, and globals&mdash;most of which have
never been documented. However _most_ things are reasonably named and you should
be able to figure out what they do from the header. Most everything you need
should be in the headers `ruby/ruby.h` and `ruby/intern.h`. The former has all
of the VM and metaprogramming functions, the latter has all of the functions for
interacting with Ruby's built in classes.

There are also some headers _not_ pulled in by `ruby.h` which you can include to
get additional API functionality. Maybe one day I'll write another section to
this guide going over them:

* `ruby/debug.h` (experimental) functions for profiling and tracing code
* `ruby/encoding.h` functions for working with string encodings
* `ruby/io.h` additional functions for Ruby's IO class
* `ruby/re.h` additional functions for Ruby's Regexp class
* `ruby/thread.h` functions for working with the [GVL](#c-in-ruby-threads)
* `ruby/version.h` functions for version introspection. Do not use this as
  feature-detection code!
* `ruby/vm.h` (experimental) functions for VM control

### Source ###

If you find some function in the header that isn't documented anywhere, your
next stop should be the Ruby source code.

{% highlight shell_session %}
$ git clone https://github.com/ruby/ruby.git
{% endhighlight %}

When reading through the source code, always keep the headers at hand: there are
lots of really useful functions in there that _look_ like they should be in the
API, but actually aren't. In most cases there should be an API function
elsewhere that wraps the call to the useful function.

### Examples ###

Head over to the [Examples](../examples) page for short, compilable examples of
the API in action.

### Contribute ###

Now that you've finished reading my guide, did you notice something significant
that I left out? Did I make some stupid mistake? Check out the [source][gh] for
this site on Github and you can report issues, submit pull requests, and
download all of the code examples.

[gh]: https://github.com/silverhammermba/emberb

## Footnotes ##

[^intern]: That's a blatant lie. The API _definitely_ lets you mess around
           with the internal data structures of objects (look for things with
           names starting with capital R). But it's generally not a good idea
           and not necessary.

[^undef]: There's also `Qundef` representing an undefined value, but
          this has no Ruby equivalent and is [rarely](#handling-blocks)
          [used](#constants-1). In fact, outside of those rare occassions,
          `Qundef` can segfault the VM if Ruby was expecting a normal `VALUE`.

[^wrap]: There's also `rb_eval_string_wrap()` which _should_ be useful, but is
         actually the same as `rb_eval_string_protect()` due to a [bug][bug2].

[^chr]: There is a `CHR2FIX()` macro, but in my tests this sometimes gave
        unexpected results. `LONG2FIX()` should work.

[^wchar]: I don't know what the best way is to handle `wchar_t`. In my tests I had
          some success just treating them as `char`s, but I think that may have
          been a happy accident, and could certainly fail on different platforms.

[^clear]: The documentation [states][control] that "You have to clear the error
          info [when] ignoring the caught exception" during `rb_protect`. But I
          can't find any documentation of when it would be cleared for
          you&mdash;it seems like you _always_ have to clear it.

[^yield]: And there's `rb_yield_block()` which takes two unused arguments and is
          never called by anything in Ruby. Odd.

[^break]: The documentation [mentions][control] `rb_iter_break()` and
          `rb_iter_break_value()` for breaking out of a block, but can't you
          just return early? I can't think of a use-case for these.

[^int]: There is also the function `rb_thread_call_without_gvl2()`. The
        documentation in `thread.c` says that if it "detects interrupt, it
        returns immediately," but I'm not sure what this means. If the
        unblocking function doesn't kill the thread, it still waits for the
        thread to finish on its own before returning.

[^ubf]: You can also use `RUBY_UBF_PROCESS`, but this seems to be a leftover
        from deprecated code and has the exact same effect.

[^oldwrap]: The `TypedData*` macros are the preferred way to wrap data since
            Ruby 1.9.2. If you're using an older version of Ruby you can check
            out an older version of this guide on Github to see how it used to
            be done.

[^maybe]: There's also the enigmatically named `rb_gc_mark_maybe()`, but I'm not
          sure when it is needed.

[^tdata]: Or use `T_DATA` if the object [wraps a C pointer](#data).

[control]: https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/master/doc/extension.rdoc#label-Control+Structure
[bug2]: https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/10466
