---
layout: chapter
title: Running Ruby in C
---

## Compiling ##

Embedding Ruby requires one header `ruby.h`, which includes a platform-specific
header `ruby/config.h`. You will probably need to tell your compiler about the
include paths for these headers. You will also need to link with the Ruby lib.
On my machine, my minimal compiler options are

{% highlight shell_session %}
$ gcc foo.c -I/usr/include/ruby-{{ site.rbversion }}.0 -I/usr/include/ruby-{{ site.rbversion }}.0/x86_64-linux -lruby
{% endhighlight %}

Though, if available, you should really use `pkg-config` to get the appropriate
options for your distribution:

{% highlight shell_session %}
$ pkg-config --cflags --libs ruby-{{ site.rbversion }}
{% endhighlight %}

## Startup, Teardown ##

Including the Ruby interpreter in your C/C++ program is pretty simple. Just
include the header, call a startup function in `main` before you use the API,
and a cleanup function after you're done:

{% highlight c %}
{% include embed/simple.c %}
{% endhighlight %}

If the VM fails to start during `ruby_init()` it will print an error and exit
your program! If you would rather have a softer error, you can instead call
`ruby_setup()` which returns a nonzero value if a failure occurred
(unfortunately it is not clear how to get a message for the error[^err]).

If an error occurs during `rb_cleanup()`, it returns a nonzero
value—otherwise it returns the argument you passed it. This allows a
little shortcut for returning an error status if the cleanup fails (as
demonstrated in the previous example).

_Technically_ you don't have to call `ruby_init`/`ruby_setup` in `main`, but the
Ruby VM assumes that all future Ruby code will be run from the same stack frame
or a lower one (for garbage collection purposes). The easiest way to ensure this
is to do set up at the top-level of your program, though other approaches could
work. But it would be a bad idea, for example, to init Ruby in some
deeply-nested function, pop a bunch of stack frames, and then run a bunch of
Ruby code.
{: .alert .alert-danger}

During cleanup, the VM might evaluate more Ruby code (if you passed a block to
`at_exit`, for example) which could raise an exception. `ruby_cleanup()` handles
these by returning a nonzero value and printing an error message. If you instead
call `ruby_finalize()` they will be raised normally (see the section on
[Exceptions](../c#rescue) for how to handle them).

Here's an alternative example:

{% highlight c %}
{% include embed/advanced.c %}
{% endhighlight %}

### Limitations ###

Other than the stack frame warning above, there is another limitation: you only
get one Ruby VM per process. The startup/teardown might make it look like you
can keep on destroying and rebuilding the VM over and over again, but
`ruby_cleanup` only makes sure that your Ruby code is all cleaned up and done.
It doesn't fully clean up the VM state such that it is ready to be
re-initialized: if you call `ruby_init` again, it will fail.

If for some reason you need multiple Ruby VMs in your program, you will need to
spin them off in multiple processes to bypass this limitation.

## Tweaking the VM ##

You now have a bare-bones Ruby VM running, but you may want to set up a little
more stuff before you start running Ruby code. To set the name of the Ruby
script (e.g. `$0`) for error messages and such, use

{% highlight c %}
ruby_script("new name")
{% endhighlight %}

To set up the load path so that gems can be loaded with `require`, use

{% highlight c %}
ruby_init_loadpath()
{% endhighlight %}

You can also pass options to the VM just like you would to `ruby` on the command
line. This is handy for stuff like setting the warning level or verbose
mode[^opt].

{% highlight c %}
{% include embed/options.c %}
{% endhighlight %}

The arguments to `ruby_options` are `argc` and `argv` just like a main function.
And just like the main of the `ruby` program, the VM expects to get some Ruby
code when you call it. If you don't give it the filename of a script to load or
code to run with `-e`, it will try to read from `stdin`. If you want to set
options but _not_ run any Ruby code, you can pass it an empty line: `"-e "`.

`ruby_options()` returns a "node" that represents the compiled Ruby code. In some
cases (such as a syntax error) the node will be invalid and you shouldn't run
it. `ruby_executable_node()` checks for this. If the node is valid, you can run it
with `ruby_exec_node()`. The state returned by `ruby_executable_node()` (through
the pointer) and by `ruby_exec_node()` will be nonzero if an exception was
raised while compiling or running the code. You can [read the exception
yourself](../c#rescue), or just pass `state` to `ruby_cleanup()` and it will
print an appropriate error message.

Ruby currently doesn't support any other way of compiling and running code
separately[^load].

## Success ##

Now you're ready to interact with Ruby! Go back to the [C API](../c).

## Footnotes ##

[^err]: `ruby_init()` uses `error_print()` to get an error message, but this
        function isn't exposed to the API. Is this a normal exception?

[^opt]: In my tests I couldn't get flags like `-w` and `-v` to do anything. This
        could be related to `ruby_prog_init()`. And really it should be possible
        to do this without parsing command line options.

[^load]: It looks like the function `rb_load_file()` should do this, but I
         haven't had any luck getting it to work.
