---
layout: chapter
title: Examples
---

## Running Ruby in C ##

This example is a simple little game of tag. In the game there are two squares:
the blue square is controlled using the arrow keys on the keyboard while the red
square is controlled by a Ruby script. To make this work, we'll use the C API to
define a little Ruby API that the script can access, and every couple of frames
we'll call a method defined in the Ruby script and pass objects encapsulating
the data for the two squares.

The Ruby script can look something like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
{% include examples/ai.rb %}
{% endhighlight %}

The C code uses SDL2 for graphics and input and uses `stat()` (which may not be
very portable) to hot-reload the AI script whenever the file is changed . Here's
`tag.c`:

{% highlight c %}
{% include examples/tag.c %}
{% endhighlight %}

The Makefile is nothing special:

{% highlight make %}
{% include examples/Makefile %}
{% endhighlight %}

## Running C in Ruby ##

This example is a Ruby C extension that wraps the [GMP][gmp] C library for
arbitrary precision arithmetic. This is far from a complete example: it only
wraps the integer functions, implements only the basic functionality of the
library, and doesn't bother nicely integrating with Ruby's existing numeric
types. If you want a _really_ full example, check out the [GMP gem][gem].

[gmp]: https://gmplib.org/
[gem]: https://github.com/srawlins/gmp

Everything is in `gmp.c` where we define our `GMP::Integer` class:

{% highlight c %}
{% include examples/ext/gmp.c %}
{% endhighlight %}

The `extconf.rb` is really simple.

{% highlight ruby %}
{% include examples/ext/extconf.rb %}
{% endhighlight %}

And now you can finally find out what your name means in base 62:

{% highlight ruby %}
{% include examples/gmp_ex.rb %}
{% endhighlight %}

For this example I tried to do everything in C, but practically that isn't
necessary (or desirable). If one of your C methods just calls a bunch of API
functions (like `to_i` and `==` in the example), you're probably only saving
yourself a couple CPU cycles compared to implementing the method in Ruby. And of
course that comes at the cost of needing to spend more time writing C and less
time writing Ruby. &#9786;

A common convention when writing extensions is to only implement the "meat" of
the extension in C and to do everything else in a regular Ruby script that pulls
in the compiled library. For example, we could have written a `gmp.rb` script to
significantly simplify our extension:

{% highlight ruby %}
{% include examples/gmp.rb %}
{% endhighlight %}
